x/gov/spec/01_concepts.md, before:

<!--
order: 1
-->

# Concepts

_Disclaimer: This is work in progress. Mechanisms are susceptible to change._

The governance process is divided in a few steps that are outlined below:

- **Proposal submission:** Proposal is submitted to the blockchain with a
  deposit.
- **Vote:** Once deposit reaches a certain value (`MinDeposit`), proposal is
  confirmed and vote opens. Bonded Atom holders can then send `TxGovVote`
  transactions to vote on the proposal.
- If the proposal involves a software upgrade:
    - **Signal:** Validators start signaling that they are ready to switch to the
    new version.
    - **Switch:** Once more than 75% of validators have signaled that they are
    ready to switch, their software automatically flips to the new version.

## Proposal submission

### Right to submit a proposal

Any Atom holder, whether bonded or unbonded, can submit proposals by sending a
`TxGovProposal` transaction. Once a proposal is submitted, it is identified by
its unique `proposalID`.

### Proposal types

In the initial version of the governance module, there are five types of
proposals:

- `TextProposal` All the proposals that do not involve a modification of
  the source code go under this type. For example, an opinion poll would use a
  proposal of type `TextProposal`.
- `SoftwareUpgradeProposal`. If accepted, validators are expected to update
  their software in accordance with the proposal. They must do so by following
  a 2-steps process described in the [Software Upgrade](#software-upgrade)
  section below. Software upgrade roadmap may be discussed and agreed on via
  `TextProposals`, but actual software upgrades must be performed via
  `SoftwareUpgradeProposals`.
- `CommunityPoolSpendProposal` details a proposal for use of community funds,
  together with how many coins are proposed to be spent, and to which recipient account.
- `ParameterChangeProposal` defines a proposal to change one or
  more parameters. If accepted, the requested parameter change is updated
  automatically by the proposal handler upon conclusion of the voting period.
- `CancelSoftwareUpgradeProposal` is a gov Content type for cancelling a software upgrade.

Other modules may expand upon the governance module by implementing their own
proposal types and handlers. These types are registered and processed through the
governance module (eg. `ParamChangeProposal`), which then execute the respective
module's proposal handler when a proposal passes. This custom handler may perform
arbitrary state changes.

## Deposit

To prevent spam, proposals must be submitted with a deposit in the coins defined in the `MinDeposit` param. The voting period will not start until the proposal's deposit equals `MinDeposit`.

When a proposal is submitted, it has to be accompanied by a deposit that must be strictly positive, but can be inferior to `MinDeposit`. The submitter doesn't need to pay for the entire deposit on their own. If a proposal's deposit is inferior to `MinDeposit`, other token holders can increase the proposal's deposit by sending a `Deposit` transaction. The deposit is kept in an escrow in the governance `ModuleAccount` until the proposal is finalized (passed or rejected).

Once the proposal's deposit reaches `MinDeposit`, it enters voting period. If proposal's deposit does not reach `MinDeposit` before `MaxDepositPeriod`, proposal closes and nobody can deposit on it anymore.

### Deposit refund and burn

When a the a proposal finalized, the coins from the deposit are either refunded or burned, according to the final tally of the proposal:

- If the proposal is approved or if it's rejected but _not_ vetoed, deposits will automatically be refunded to their respective depositor (transferred from the governance `ModuleAccount`).
- When the proposal is vetoed with a supermajority, deposits be burned from the governance `ModuleAccount`.

## Vote

### Participants

_Participants_ are users that have the right to vote on proposals. On the
Cosmos Hub, participants are bonded Atom holders. Unbonded Atom holders and
other users do not get the right to participate in governance. However, they
can submit and deposit on proposals.

Note that some _participants_ can be forbidden to vote on a proposal under a
certain validator if:

- _participant_ bonded or unbonded Atoms to said validator after proposal
  entered voting period.
- _participant_ became validator after proposal entered voting period.

This does not prevent _participant_ to vote with Atoms bonded to other
validators. For example, if a _participant_ bonded some Atoms to validator A
before a proposal entered voting period and other Atoms to validator B after
proposal entered voting period, only the vote under validator B will be
forbidden.

### Voting period

Once a proposal reaches `MinDeposit`, it immediately enters `Voting period`. We
define `Voting period` as the interval between the moment the vote opens and
the moment the vote closes. `Voting period` should always be shorter than
`Unbonding period` to prevent double voting. The initial value of
`Voting period` is 2 weeks.

### Option set

The option set of a proposal refers to the set of choices a participant can
choose from when casting its vote.

The initial option set includes the following options:

- `Yes`
- `No`
- `NoWithVeto`
- `Abstain`

`NoWithVeto` counts as `No` but also adds a `Veto` vote. `Abstain` option
allows voters to signal that they do not intend to vote in favor or against the
proposal but accept the result of the vote.

_Note: from the UI, for urgent proposals we should maybe add a ‘Not Urgent’
option that casts a `NoWithVeto` vote._

### Weighted Votes

[ADR-037](../../../docs/architecture/adr-037-gov-split-vote.md) introduces the weighted vote feature which allows a staker to split their votes into several voting options. For example, it could use 70% of its voting power to vote Yes and 30% of its voting power to vote No.

Often times the entity owning that address might not be a single individual. For example, a company might have different stakeholders who want to vote differently, and so it makes sense to allow them to split their voting power. Currently, it is not possible for them to do "passthrough voting" and giving their users voting rights over their tokens. However, with this system, exchanges can poll their users for voting preferences, and then vote on-chain proportionally to the results of the poll.

To represent weighted vote on chain, we use the following Protobuf message.

+++ https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/v0.43.0-alpha1/proto/cosmos/gov/v1beta1/gov.proto#L32-L40

+++ https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/v0.43.0-alpha1/proto/cosmos/gov/v1beta1/gov.proto#L126-L137

For a weighted vote to be valid, the `options` field must not contain duplicate vote options, and the sum of weights of all options must be equal to 1.

### Quorum

Quorum is defined as the minimum percentage of voting power that needs to be
casted on a proposal for the result to be valid.

### Threshold

Threshold is defined as the minimum proportion of `Yes` votes (excluding
`Abstain` votes) for the proposal to be accepted.

Initially, the threshold is set at 50% with a possibility to veto if more than
1/3rd of votes (excluding `Abstain` votes) are `NoWithVeto` votes. This means
that proposals are accepted if the proportion of `Yes` votes (excluding
`Abstain` votes) at the end of the voting period is superior to 50% and if the
proportion of `NoWithVeto` votes is inferior to 1/3 (excluding `Abstain`
votes).

### Inheritance

If a delegator does not vote, it will inherit its validator vote.

- If the delegator votes before its validator, it will not inherit from the
  validator's vote.
- If the delegator votes after its validator, it will override its validator
  vote with its own. If the proposal is urgent, it is possible
  that the vote will close before delegators have a chance to react and
  override their validator's vote. This is not a problem, as proposals require more than 2/3rd of the total voting power to pass before the end of the voting period. If more than 2/3rd of validators collude, they can censor the votes of delegators anyway.

### Validator’s punishment for non-voting

At present, validators are not punished for failing to vote.

### Governance address

Later, we may add permissioned keys that could only sign txs from certain modules. For the MVP, the `Governance address` will be the main validator address generated at account creation. This address corresponds to a different PrivKey than the Tendermint PrivKey which is responsible for signing consensus messages. Validators thus do not have to sign governance transactions with the sensitive Tendermint PrivKey.

## Software Upgrade

If proposals are of type `SoftwareUpgradeProposal`, then nodes need to upgrade
their software to the new version that was voted. This process is divided in
two steps.

### Signal

After a `SoftwareUpgradeProposal` is accepted, validators are expected to
download and install the new version of the software while continuing to run
the previous version. Once a validator has downloaded and installed the
upgrade, it will start signaling to the network that it is ready to switch by
including the proposal's `proposalID` in its _precommits_.(_Note: Confirmation
that we want it in the precommit?_)

Note: There is only one signal slot per _precommit_. If several
`SoftwareUpgradeProposals` are accepted in a short timeframe, a pipeline will
form and they will be implemented one after the other in the order that they
were accepted.

### Switch

Once a block contains more than 2/3rd _precommits_ where a common
`SoftwareUpgradeProposal` is signaled, all the nodes (including validator
nodes, non-validating full nodes and light-nodes) are expected to switch to the
new version of the software.

_Note: Not clear how the flip is handled programmatically_

Commit message:

Add spec for emergency voting (#249)
* Add simple changelog

* Update x/gov/spec/01_concepts.md

Co-authored-by: Aleksandr Bezobchuk <alexanderbez@users.noreply.github.com>

Co-authored-by: Aleksandr Bezobchuk <alexanderbez@users.noreply.github.com>

x/gov/spec/01_concepts.md, after:

<!--
order: 1
-->

# Concepts

_Disclaimer: This is work in progress. Mechanisms are susceptible to change._

The governance process is divided in a few steps that are outlined below:

- **Proposal submission:** Proposal is submitted to the blockchain with a
  deposit.
- **Vote:** Once deposit reaches a certain value (`MinDeposit`), proposal is
  confirmed and vote opens. Bonded Atom holders can then send `TxGovVote`
  transactions to vote on the proposal.
- If the proposal involves a software upgrade:
    - **Signal:** Validators start signaling that they are ready to switch to the
    new version.
    - **Switch:** Once more than 75% of validators have signaled that they are
    ready to switch, their software automatically flips to the new version.

## Proposal submission

### Right to submit a proposal

Any Atom holder, whether bonded or unbonded, can submit proposals by sending a
`TxGovProposal` transaction. Once a proposal is submitted, it is identified by
its unique `proposalID`.

### Proposal types

In the initial version of the governance module, there are five types of
proposals:

- `TextProposal` All the proposals that do not involve a modification of
  the source code go under this type. For example, an opinion poll would use a
  proposal of type `TextProposal`.
- `SoftwareUpgradeProposal`. If accepted, validators are expected to update
  their software in accordance with the proposal. They must do so by following
  a 2-steps process described in the [Software Upgrade](#software-upgrade)
  section below. Software upgrade roadmap may be discussed and agreed on via
  `TextProposals`, but actual software upgrades must be performed via
  `SoftwareUpgradeProposals`.
- `CommunityPoolSpendProposal` details a proposal for use of community funds,
  together with how many coins are proposed to be spent, and to which recipient account.
- `ParameterChangeProposal` defines a proposal to change one or
  more parameters. If accepted, the requested parameter change is updated
  automatically by the proposal handler upon conclusion of the voting period.
- `CancelSoftwareUpgradeProposal` is a gov Content type for cancelling a software upgrade.

Other modules may expand upon the governance module by implementing their own
proposal types and handlers. These types are registered and processed through the
governance module (eg. `ParamChangeProposal`), which then execute the respective
module's proposal handler when a proposal passes. This custom handler may perform
arbitrary state changes.

## Deposit

To prevent spam, proposals must be submitted with a deposit in the coins defined in the `MinDeposit` param. The voting period will not start until the proposal's deposit equals `MinDeposit`.

When a proposal is submitted, it has to be accompanied by a deposit that must be strictly positive, but can be inferior to `MinDeposit`. The submitter doesn't need to pay for the entire deposit on their own. If a proposal's deposit is inferior to `MinDeposit`, other token holders can increase the proposal's deposit by sending a `Deposit` transaction. The deposit is kept in an escrow in the governance `ModuleAccount` until the proposal is finalized (passed or rejected).

Once the proposal's deposit reaches `MinDeposit`, it enters voting period. If proposal's deposit does not reach `MinDeposit` before `MaxDepositPeriod`, proposal closes and nobody can deposit on it anymore.

### Deposit refund and burn

When a the a proposal finalized, the coins from the deposit are either refunded or burned, according to the final tally of the proposal:

- If the proposal is approved or if it's rejected but _not_ vetoed, deposits will automatically be refunded to their respective depositor (transferred from the governance `ModuleAccount`).
- When the proposal is vetoed with a supermajority, deposits be burned from the governance `ModuleAccount`.

## Vote

### Participants

_Participants_ are users that have the right to vote on proposals. On the
Cosmos Hub, participants are bonded Atom holders. Unbonded Atom holders and
other users do not get the right to participate in governance. However, they
can submit and deposit on proposals.

Note that some _participants_ can be forbidden to vote on a proposal under a
certain validator if:

- _participant_ bonded or unbonded Atoms to said validator after proposal
  entered voting period.
- _participant_ became validator after proposal entered voting period.

This does not prevent _participant_ to vote with Atoms bonded to other
validators. For example, if a _participant_ bonded some Atoms to validator A
before a proposal entered voting period and other Atoms to validator B after
proposal entered voting period, only the vote under validator B will be
forbidden.

### Voting period

Once a proposal reaches `MinDeposit`, it immediately enters `Voting period`. We
define `Voting period` as the interval between the moment the vote opens and
the moment the vote closes. `Voting period` should always be shorter than
`Unbonding period` to prevent double voting. The initial value of
`Voting period` is 2 weeks.

### Option set

The option set of a proposal refers to the set of choices a participant can
choose from when casting its vote.

The initial option set includes the following options:

- `Yes`
- `No`
- `NoWithVeto`
- `Abstain`

`NoWithVeto` counts as `No` but also adds a `Veto` vote. `Abstain` option
allows voters to signal that they do not intend to vote in favor or against the
proposal but accept the result of the vote.

_Note: from the UI, for urgent proposals we should maybe add a ‘Not Urgent’
option that casts a `NoWithVeto` vote._

### Weighted Votes

[ADR-037](../../../docs/architecture/adr-037-gov-split-vote.md) introduces the weighted vote feature which allows a staker to split their votes into several voting options. For example, it could use 70% of its voting power to vote Yes and 30% of its voting power to vote No.

Often times the entity owning that address might not be a single individual. For example, a company might have different stakeholders who want to vote differently, and so it makes sense to allow them to split their voting power. Currently, it is not possible for them to do "passthrough voting" and giving their users voting rights over their tokens. However, with this system, exchanges can poll their users for voting preferences, and then vote on-chain proportionally to the results of the poll.

To represent weighted vote on chain, we use the following Protobuf message.

+++ https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/v0.43.0-alpha1/proto/cosmos/gov/v1beta1/gov.proto#L32-L40

+++ https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/v0.43.0-alpha1/proto/cosmos/gov/v1beta1/gov.proto#L126-L137

For a weighted vote to be valid, the `options` field must not contain duplicate vote options, and the sum of weights of all options must be equal to 1.

### Quorum

Quorum is defined as the minimum percentage of voting power that needs to be
casted on a proposal for the result to be valid.

### Expedited Proposals

A proposal can be expedited, making the proposal use shorter voting duration and a higher tally threshold by its default. If an expedited proposal fails to meet the threshold within the scope of shorter voting duration, the expedited proposal is then converted to a regular proposal and restarts voting under regular voting conditions.

### Threshold

Threshold is defined as the minimum proportion of `Yes` votes (excluding
`Abstain` votes) for the proposal to be accepted.

Initially, the threshold is set at 50% with a possibility to veto if more than
1/3rd of votes (excluding `Abstain` votes) are `NoWithVeto` votes. This means
that proposals are accepted if the proportion of `Yes` votes (excluding
`Abstain` votes) at the end of the voting period is superior to 50% and if the
proportion of `NoWithVeto` votes is inferior to 1/3 (excluding `Abstain`
votes).

For expedited proposals, it has a higher minimum threshold as its initial parameter, set at 66.7%.

### Inheritance

If a delegator does not vote, it will inherit its validator vote.

- If the delegator votes before its validator, it will not inherit from the
  validator's vote.
- If the delegator votes after its validator, it will override its validator
  vote with its own. If the proposal is urgent, it is possible
  that the vote will close before delegators have a chance to react and
  override their validator's vote. This is not a problem, as proposals require more than 2/3rd of the total voting power to pass before the end of the voting period. If more than 2/3rd of validators collude, they can censor the votes of delegators anyway.

### Validator’s punishment for non-voting

At present, validators are not punished for failing to vote.

### Governance address

Later, we may add permissioned keys that could only sign txs from certain modules. For the MVP, the `Governance address` will be the main validator address generated at account creation. This address corresponds to a different PrivKey than the Tendermint PrivKey which is responsible for signing consensus messages. Validators thus do not have to sign governance transactions with the sensitive Tendermint PrivKey.

## Software Upgrade

If proposals are of type `SoftwareUpgradeProposal`, then nodes need to upgrade
their software to the new version that was voted. This process is divided in
two steps.

### Signal

After a `SoftwareUpgradeProposal` is accepted, validators are expected to
download and install the new version of the software while continuing to run
the previous version. Once a validator has downloaded and installed the
upgrade, it will start signaling to the network that it is ready to switch by
including the proposal's `proposalID` in its _precommits_.(_Note: Confirmation
that we want it in the precommit?_)

Note: There is only one signal slot per _precommit_. If several
`SoftwareUpgradeProposals` are accepted in a short timeframe, a pipeline will
form and they will be implemented one after the other in the order that they
were accepted.

### Switch

Once a block contains more than 2/3rd _precommits_ where a common
`SoftwareUpgradeProposal` is signaled, all the nodes (including validator
nodes, non-validating full nodes and light-nodes) are expected to switch to the
new version of the software.

_Note: Not clear how the flip is handled programmatically_
